In the previous practicals, we have been gaining experience in conducting statistical tests on data collected from a variety of sampling and experimental designs. In today?s practical, we will focus on some of the important principles of design, and the reasons why design and analyses are really two sides of the same issue.	 

We will then gain further experience in applying the tests learnt in the previous practicals (without giving you the step by step instructions in Minitab).

At the end of today?s practical, you should be able to:
?	explain the reasons for replication
?	understand the need for independent samples
?	explain why it is important to avoid confounding
?	understand how design relates to the power of an experiment
?	recognise the sampling or experimental designs that are analysed by t-tests, linear regression, ANOVA or categorical data analyses
?	apply the tests learnt in the previous practicals to new data sets

Recommended reading:
?	McKillup 2012. Chapter 4, or
?	McKillup and Dyar 2010. Chapter 4

When doing these exercises, consider whether the experiments have met these important criteria.

Replication. Given the variation in natural systems, single measures are unable to represent the populations from which they were sampled (e.g., the height of a single basketball player tells you nothing about the average height of a population). Replicate measures must be taken to estimate population parameters.

Independence. Replicate measures are independent if they are equally likely to be selected from the population of possible measures. If they are related in some way, they are more likely to share similar values and then the sample is not representative of the population it is trying to estimate. We can ensure independence by the ways in which we select sampling units (e.g. randomly selected sites), or the way in which we run our experiments (e.g., in an experiment, use each animal only once, not twice in two different treatments). Problems with independence cannot be fixed by fiddling with the data afterwards.

Avoiding confounding. Effective sampling or experiments are designed to vary the factor of interest while either; a) holding other possible factors constant, or b) allowing them to vary naturally. We have a big problem if another factor varies with our factor of interest.

For example, if we wanted to contrast the abundance of native birds between a natural park and an urban development but decided to only survey the development in the morning and only survey the park at midday, our factor of interest (habitat) would be confounded by time of day. Given that bird activity is usually highest in the morning and low at midday, we would be less likely to be able to pick up differences between habitats, and if we found a difference, we would be unable to logically conclude whether it was due to habitat differences, or due to differences in time of day.

The TV show ?Mythbusters? makes extensive use of experiments to test urban Myths. These myths are essentially hypotheses based on observation, and their experiments test predictions of these hypotheses. As a result the team approach their mythbusting in accordance with the classic scientific method. But do they always design good experiments?

In the first four exercises, we will look at short videos of experiments conducted on the show, and critically examine their experimental designs.

Bring some headphones so that you can hear the commentary.


1) Do sharks have a colour preference?


In this exercise, the team from Mythbusters test the myth that sharks are attracted to the colour yellow. 
	 

The video can be viewed at: http://dsc.discovery.com/videos/mythbusters-seeing-red.html

Watch the video and then answer the questions below which relate to issues of pseudo-replication and independence in their experimental design.

1a) In the first experiment, did they apply treatments independently? Why or why not?

	
	
	
	

1b) In the second experiment, were their ?replicates? (i.e. the hits on the different colours) sampled independently. Explain your answer.

	
	
	
	
	
	
 
1c) Suggest what they need to do in order to improve their experimental design to test whether using a yellow surfboard increases risk of attack by a shark.

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	


2) Can eating poppy seeds result in failed drugs tests?

Poppy seeds come from the opium poppy, Papaver somniferum, and do contain low concentrations of opiates (e.g., morphine). In this video, the team from Mythbusters test the myth that eating poppy seeds could result in the consumer failing a test for illegal drug use.	 
The video can be viewed at: http://dsc.discovery.com/videos/mythbusters-poppy-seed-drug-test-minimyth.html

2a) List the possible sources of variance (biological and experimental) in this experiment.

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 
2b) The Mythbusters experiment did show that eating poppy seeds can result in a positive test for illegal opiates (although their test used a cut-off of 300 ng/mL in the urine which has now been raised to 2000 ng/ML to avoid such cases). This may be useful if you were a lawyer defending a client on an illegal drugs case, but it doesn?t tell us anything about the likelihood of a positive test from eating poppy seeds. Design an experiment that would give estimates of this likelihood, keeping in mind the possible sources of variation identified in 2a. Provide details of the food consumed, the consumer, the duration and testing.

	
	
	
	
	
	
	

2c) In words, describe what outcomes of this test would result in a type I error and a type II error.

	
	
	


3) Do flies avoid rooms with water?

There is an urban myth that bags filled with water are an effective way to repel flies. According to highly respected science website, Answers.com, this is because ?the common house fly has a morbid fear of drowning and is somewhat claustrophobic so goes out of its way to avoid enclosed bodies of water?. In this experiment, the team from Mythbusters design a simple experiment to test this myth.	 
The video can be viewed at: http://dsc.discovery.com/videos/mythbusters-no-fly-zone.html

3a) What statistical test should be used to analyse the results from their experiment (i.e., numbers of flies in each compartment).

	
	
	
 
3b) Can you identify any confounding factors in their experiment that could have affected their results?

	
	
	

3c) Given that most of us don?t have bags of rotten meat hanging around in our houses, design an experiment to test this hypothesis in more realistic conditions.

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	


4) Are men wimps?

Men and women are thought to vary in their tolerance to pain. Here the team from Mythbusters test the hypothesis that men are less tolerant to pain than women by measuring how long volunteers could immerse their hands in icy-cold water.

The video can be viewed at: http://dsc.discovery.com/videos/mythbusters-men-vs-women-minimyth.html
	 

4a) How representative of the population at large was their sample of volunteers? How does this affect our ability to infer population level traits from the sample?

	
	
	
 
4b) The mean times are presented at the end of the video (100.4 seconds for women, 84.3 seconds for men). What is the problem with concluding that women have a greater tolerance for pain from these data?

	
	
	

4c) What statistical test would be appropriate for analysis these data?

	
	

4d). If the variances were 60 for women and 50 for men with 3 individuals sampled for each sex, would there be a significant effect of sex?

	
	

4e). With the same variances, would you detect a significant difference with 10 individuals sampled for each sex? 

	
	

4f). The power of a statistical test is the ability to detect a difference when in fact a difference does exist. Experiments with high power have a low probability of type II error. What aspects of the experimental design for this example could be changed to increase the power of the test?

	
	
	
	
	
	
 
The following three exercises require you to recognize which test to apply to data sets that have been collected from different sampling or experimental designs, and use the methods for those tests from previous practicals to test the stated hypotheses. Some of these examples are based on questions from past exams in BEES2041.

Choosing which test to apply to what data is an essential skill, but is not separate from the issues of design. Of greatest importance is that sampling or experiments are designed with the tests in mind. Then researchers will know which test to run, and avoid the problem of wasting time and money by collecting data that then cannot be analysed.

For the tests that we have learnt so far, the choice of test can be determined by a combination of how many X and Y variables, and whether they are continuous or categorical Refer to the lecture notes for each section for details on the hypotheses that the analyses are testing (e.g., a t-test contrasts two means).

Dependent (Y) variable(s)	Independent (X) variable(s)	Analyses
Counts of categories	One categorical variable

2 or more categorical variables
	?2 goodness of fit tests

?2 test of independence (contingency tables)

Fisher?s exact test
Single, continuous Y variable	Single, continuous X	linear regression
Single, continuous Y variable	Single, categorical X variable
?	two levels of X
o	each data point collected from separate subjects
o	data from each level collected from same subject
	

t-test



paired t-test
Single, continuous Y variable	Single, categorical X variable
?	> 2 levels of X	
one-way ANOVA

Single, continuous Y variable	More than 1 categorical X variable
?	all combinations of all levels of all factors present
?	levels of a factor unique to certain levels of another factor	multifactor ANOVA, general linear models
?	factorial ANOVA


?	nested ANOVA


 
5) Does bush regeneration work?

An environmental scientist was testing the effectiveness of a bush regeneration program. At ten sites, a fixed 10 x 10 m plot was censused before and after the regeneration efforts. In each census all plant species were recorded and the percentage of weed species calculated. The following data were obtained.	 
Site	Before	After
1	45	35
2	37	38
3	23	20
4	12	11
5	38	25
6	24	12
7	18	22
8	5	8
9	27	28
10	8	12

5a) What statistical test could be used to test whether the bush regeneration program had any effect on the percentage of plant species that were weeds?

	
	
	

5b) Conduct the test, give the value of the test statistic, and whether the null hypothesis is rejected or retained

	
	
	

5c) Does your test support the proposition that money spent on bush regeneration at these sites is an effective way to control weeds? Give reasons for your answer.

	
	
	
	

?
5d) What aspects of the sampling design could be improved to increase the statistical power to detect differences between the plots before and after the bush regeneration program?

	
	
	
	


6) Can beer deter slugs?

You are working for a biotech company that develops natural slug deterrents as part of an eco-friendly strategy for their pesticides. The company has developed a new product to deter slugs based on beer and they ask you to determine if their new product (X) deters slugs better than two toxic compounds (A and B) used by their competitors. For each compound, you count the number of slugs caught in 3 trials per compound, each involving a single slug traps placed in an arena with 25 slugs. Each trap has an attractive bait, but once caught the slug dies. Each trap is surrounded by a 2 cm edge that contains the deterrent compound, and the key response is the number of slugs found trapped. Experiments were run for two time periods 6 hours and 12 hours.	 

The experiment yielded the following data:

Product	Duration	Number of slugs
X	6	3
X	6	2
X	6	1
X	12	12
X	12	14
X	12	9
A	6	9
A	6	8
A	6	12
A	12	15
A	12	13
A	12	11
B	6	7
B	6	8
B	6	10
B	12	15
B	12	14
B	12	16

?
6a) What statistical test could be used to test whether the effectiveness of the new product differs from the existing products?

	
	
	

6b) Conduct the test, give the value of the test statistics, and whether the null hypotheses is rejected or retained. Was the effectiveness dependent on the experimental duration?

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
6c) An early design for this experiment had all products (3 replicates per product) offered simultaneously in a single arena? What is the problem with this experimental design?

	
	
	
	
	




